<h1>SCIENTIFIC BACKGROUND</h1>


</h3>1. Proteins in Science</h3>

Understanding protein’s role in cellular mechanisms still remains of central importance in biology and medicine as the majority of biological processes are regulated by their association and dissociation states. Moreover, proteins are organized to generate macromolecular complexes which represent the basic essential functional units of cellular machinery[1]. However, since the thrive of genome sequencing, protein annotations have been hanging back. The latter has generated a break in the flow of information between raw sequences and biochemical knowledge[1]. Hence, structural characterization of protein complexes can serve as a link between genome sequencing, functional genomics, proteomics and systems biology[2].


</h3>2. Protein Structure</h3>

Most of the essential cell activities are mediated by proteins. Proteins are linear polymers of amino acids linked by peptide bonds; it is the amino acid sequence (primary structure) that determines the three-dimensional structure of the protein[3]. Amino acids are small molecules that contain an amino group (NH2), a carboxyl group (COOH), a hydrogen atom and a side chain (R) attached to a central alpha (α) carbon. The side chain distinguishes between different amino acids and it also determines its chemical properties. The peptide bond has important implications for the 3D structures that can be formed by polypeptides, it is planar and quite rigid. Therefore, the polypeptide chain has rotational freedom only about the bonds formed by the α-carbons Phi(Cα-N) and Psi(Cα-C’) which at the same time are restricted by the steric hindrance between the side chains of the backbone[3]. The Ramachandran plot is the most powerful check for stereo-chemical quality of a protein structure. This plot integrates information about the Psi main-chain torsion angle versus the Phi main-chain torsion angle for every amino acid residue in the protein. The result is a scatter plot where points are clustered together in favourable regions, thus avoiding disallowed regions due to steric hindrance of the side-chain atoms. The favourable regions correspond to regular secondary structures and they have been determined from an analysis of torsion angles of structures in the PDB. So, once the primary structure has been arranged in a local conformation, we call that the secondary structure. There are two main local conformations, the alpha helix and the beta sheets. Both satisfy the peptide bond constraints, exhibit a high degree of regularity across the polypeptide and are stabilized by hydrogen bond interactions between the backbone atoms. Making them very energetically favourable conformations[3]. Besides these, there are other non-regular secondary structures referred as loops. Loop regions are commonly present at the surface of the protein and can be transitions between regular structures or have own significance by being part of the functional portion of the protein. Also to notice, there are different amino acid propensities for each secondary structure. The fact that certain amino acids tend to appear at different rates depending on the secondary structure, is also transferred to higher-order structural classifications and types of interaction. These secondary structural elements combine in 3D space to yield the tertiary structure (fold) of a protein. There are many combinations possible and these are done through interactions between the side chains of the constituent amino acids. Moreover, within the protein fold distinct domains and motifs can be recognized. Domains are compact sections with structural and usually functional independence. Conversely, motifs (also known as super-secondary structure) are a combination of secondary structural elements that not always act independently. Motifs are integral elements of the protein fold and thus are seen repeatedly across many structures. Besides, motifs are associated with functional significance and can represent a minimal functional unit within a protein. Also, several motifs can combine to form specific domains.  Until now we have described the organization of a single polypeptide chain. However, many proteins exist as non-covalent association of independently folded polypeptides (quaternary structure) which can be homomeric or heteromeric[3]. 

Three-dimensional determination of homomeric and heteromeric protein complexes have expanded our understanding of biological function and evolution. However, principles governing the existing diversity of protein quaternary structures still lack interpretation. Recent studies have shown that assembling pathways can be characterized by dimerization, cyclation and subunit addition steps. A combination of these steps generates many possible quaternary structure topologies. This model has been validated, and it has been proven that ~92% of known protein- complex structures fall inside their structure space. As a critical advantage, this method is able to organize complexes in a “periodic table” in relation to the number of subunit repeats and types within a complex. Moreover, with the use of prediction models these information sets the basis for replicating relative frequencies of known structures, but also predicts new topologies most likely to be observed. Overall, it provides potential constraints for multi-subunit docking and hybrid methods and complex bioengineering[4].       


</h3>3. Nucleic Acid Structure

Genome-wide studies of protein interactions have demonstrated that cells generate thousands of macromolecular assemblies of many different sizes. From dimers to complexes that comprise tends of hundreds of polypeptide and/or nucleic acid chains. Therefore, the structural analysis should not be limited only to the isolated components [5]. Nucleic acids are a concatenation of individual acid units, the nucleotides. Four different types were discovered first, the guanylic, adenylic, cytidylic and thymidylic acids. When these acids are cleaved, the molecule is separated in a phosphate group and one of the four distinct nucleosides. Each nucleoside consists of a deoxy-pentose sugar and one of four nitrogen-containing heterocyclic bases. Therefore, each repeating unit in a nucleic acid polymer comprises a phosphate group, a sugar and one of the four bases linked together[3]. The bases are planar aromatic heterocyclic molecules and can be divided into two major groups. On one side, the pyrimidine bases are thymine and cytosine. And on the other side, the purine bases adenine and guanine. Thymidine is replaced by uracil in the ribonucleic acids (RNA). RNA has an extra hydroxyl group at the 2’ position of their pentose sugar group. The sugar present in RNA is pentose, while deoxyribose forms DNA. Individual nucleosides are joined together in a linear manner trough the phosphate groups attached to the 3’ and 5’ positions of the sugars, what is known as glycosidic bond. By convention, oligonucleotide chains are numbered starting by the 5’ end. The planar bases complementary associate through hydrogen bonds. In native double-helical DNA, the two bases in a base pair necessarily arise from two separate strands of DNA (with intermolecular hydrogen bonds) and so hold the DNA double helix together (Watson and Crick, 1953). The adenine and thymine base pair has two hydrogen bonds, while the guanine and cytosine base pair has three. Moreover, the sugar groups are attached to the bases asymmetrically one the same side of the base pair. This defines the mutual positions of the two sugar-phosphate strands in DNA and generates a minor and a major grove across the DNA molecule[3]. Nucleic acids can adopt different conformations. For instance, DNA can be in the form of duplexes as shown by Watson and Crick, or in tetrameric arrangements of DNA and RNA helices. RNA is more flexible in structure but it is generally organized as a single strand. Accurate bond lengths and angle geometries for all bases, nucleosides and nucleotides have been well stablished by X-ray crystallography analysis. These parameters have been incorporated in the AMBER (weiner and Kollman, 1981) force fields widely used in molecular mechanics and dynamic modelling. Crystallographic analysis produces high-resolution quantitative information on electron-density distribution in the molecule and thus give hints on partial atomic charges[3].


4. Structure to function 

A fundamental principle is that protein structure leads to protein function. It is the precise location of chemical groups distributed in a particular three-dimensional space, that makes proteins act as catalysts for a myriad of functions essential to cellular machinery[3]. Therefore, structure of a protein can reveal not only its function but also its evolutionary history. The Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) database was built to integrate this information in hierarchical levels. Proteins share the same fold when they have a very similar disposition of the regular secondary structures. Protein Families are groups of proteins related by homology (>30% sequence identity) and have similar structure and function. Super-families integrate proteins that have low sequence similarity but show similar structural patterns and similar function. And classes group folds based on the disposition of secondary structures[3]. This information can be applied for instance in distantly related proteins, where structure is more conserved than sequence. In this case, proteins might still retain the architecture and typology of their ancestral fold[3]. 

Since protein functions are diverse, it makes sense to think that protein structures are similarly varied. However, early work showed that there are there are striking regularities in the way in which secondary structures are assembled and the topologies of polypeptide chains. These regularities come from intrinsic physical and chemical properties of proteins and provide the basis for fold classification. This is explained because nature has a tendency to reduce complexity to manageable levels but without sacrificing diversity and adaptability[3]. More than two decades ago, Cyrus Chothia estimated that there were roughly 1,000 protein folds in nature. This assumption was made on the basis of proportion of genes similar to three-dimensional structures. A bit more than a decade ago, this estimate stood over the 700-800 known folds. And the increase is levelling despite the exponential growth in newly known structures. Therefore, it is clear that nature is restricted to few scaffolds to perform a great diversity of functions[6]. With recent advancements in the field, cellular interaction maps are being build. This has generated an interest in answering the question of how many different protein-protein interaction types exist in nature. There are now attempts to determine structures for large assemblies. And studies show that the limitation relates to the available three-dimensional templates on which to model the interactions. Therefore, community has a need to generate a comprehensive possible repertoire of interaction templates[6]. Nowadays it is also accepted that the number of interaction types is also limited. It has been estimated that most interactions in nature will conform to one of about 10,000 types, while just around 2,000 of which have been defined[6].   


5. Protein-Protein Interactions

Structural bioinformatics methods want to probe structure-function relationships. The integration of structural and functional data allows us to build comprehensive molecular models of mechanism, specificity and dynamics[3]. PPI characterization is an essential step towards 1) identification of new drug targets, 2) modification and engineering of protein activity and 3) interpretation of the impact of allelic variations. To do so, we need to go deep by understanding which amino acids mediate PPI’s binding affinity and give interaction specificity[7].

Despite the various types of PPI, they can broadly be classified as permanent and transient. Permanent interactions are obligate, oligomeric, tight and more stable than transient interactions. While transient interactions present different levels of co-expression and co-evolution, permanent ones display higher tendencies to be co-expressed and co-localized. Moreover, amino acid residues mediating permanent interactions evolve at a slower rate, thus being more conserved, than those of transient interactions.  Even if transient interfaces have weaker signs of evolutionary pressure, implicated residues are still more conserved than general surface residues[7]. 

An additional category is one described by disordered regions or unstructured segments of proteins. The majority of eukaryotic proteins display all three types of interactions. For instance, tumor suppressor p53 protein has disordered regions that improve conformational heterogeneity and thus the ability to bind to a multitude of protein partners. Alternative splicing events and posttranslational modifications, that are common in disordered regions, also boost the number of possible binding partners. Studies show that even if there is a degree of evolutionary conserved functional residues in disordered regions, they also have higher evolutionary pressure than ordered regions[7]. 

Complementarity is a critical feature for both stability and specificity of the interaction. Interfaces are geometrically and chemically complementary. This means that the shape of the two protein surfaces fit, and that polar groups pair to form hydrogen bonds[8]. 

Protein complexes subunits interact by means of the interface region on their surfaces. It has been shown that the characteristics in amino acid frequency, packing, hydrophobicity and conservation of the interface regions are more similar to the protein’s core than to the general surface residues. However, studies suggest that this dependence increases in complexity when the core is surrounded by a border region of non-implicated residues. Also residues in binding regions are less flexible than the remaining surface residues. Still, there is certain degree of specificity related to the interaction type. Moreover, as transient complexes have faster association and dissociation dynamics, they are underrepresented in structural data. In addition, obligate interactions are tighter than transient ones. Transient interfaces are planar, less conserved, and smaller than the obligate ones. Thus, geometric and electrostatic complementary play an important role in complex stability[9].  

Hot spots are those residues in the protein interface which have a higher energetic contribution in the binding mechanics. They are usually present in obligate complexes but might appear in transient complexes too. Hot spots are structurally conserved, meaning it is not imperative they share sequence similarity. Despite all gathered knowledge, there is not yet a general pointing out interface regions from the rest of the protein’s surface. Efforts are being made for the design of effective prediction algorithms to model protein interactions[9]. 

Mutational studies are used to examine the energetic, catalytic and dynamic role of interface residues. However, this technique is highly costly and time consuming, making it not applicable for large amounts of data. Therefore, the use of computational approaches is of utmost importance for the analysis of sequence and structure information that will lead to the identification of new PPIs[7].


8. Kinetics and thermodynamics of protein-protein interactions

The study of the physical chemistry of non-covalent PPIs aims at the understanding of the origin of affinity that enables macromolecules to form stable, complex and self-assemblies; what governs the specificity for unique assemblies; and which are the physical features that have functionality over their individual components. Some decades ago, a hint over these processes was already given. It is now known that synthesis and folding of highly complex macromolecules involves intermolecular interactions of van der Waals attraction and repulsion, electrostatic interactions, hydrogen-bond formations and hydrophobicity. All together they provide stability for complementary structures that are in juxtaposition and have complementary surfaces and distribution of active groups. Now we are able to quantify and modify these effects to better understand complex interactions. Calorimetric measures on the thermodynamic-state functions that accompany association are Gibbs energy (free enthalpy), enthalpy and entropy. PPIs equilibrium is defined by stoichiometry and affinity. The ratio between association and dissociation reactions is the equilibrium constant. The free enthalpy of dissociation determines the stability of the complex and characterizes the affinity of the components. The free energy change breaks down into an enthalpic contribution and an entropic contribution, and they both depend on temperature[8].

The interaction between two proteins can be quantified just when atomic coordinates are available. One of the measures relates with the interface area. This is obtained by comparing the solvent-accessible surface of the complex to that of its individual components. Studies show that there is a possible relationship between the interface area, affinity and occurrence of conformational changes. Moreover, the interface contains non-polar groups mostly from side-chains and polar groups that come from both the main-chain and the side-chains of amino acids. Non-polar groups contribute to the complex’s stabilization through hydrophobic effects, and polar groups through hydrogen bonds. For soluble proteins, their interface is has more or less the same non-polar:polar ratio than the average surface. However, for subunits of oligomeric proteins have interfaces that tend to be larger and more hydrophobic. Changes are also apparent in the amino acid composition of interfaces. Leucine is the most abundant residue for subunit interfaces while arginine is at higher proportions in protein-protein interfaces. Also to notice, water is normally excluded from the contact region but it can serve as bridge between two polar groups between the complex partners. Likewise, both non-polar and polar chemical groups buried in the interface become hydrated when the complex dissociates[8]. 

Site-directed mutagenesis is often used to evaluate the contribution of affinity made by individual amino-acid side chains and residue pairwise interactions at interfaces. Its effect calculated as the variation of the dissociation free energy. The systematic substitution to alanine (Alanine Scanning) effectively deletes a side chain and all its interactions, usually with little structural perturbations. This has shown that the majority of interface residues can be mutated without deriving in large effects on dissociation constants. Therefore, it is clear that the functional epitope is a subset of the structural epitope. Residue pairs formed by salt bridges and charged hydrogen bonds yield the largest in the interaction, while pairs making neutral hydrogen bonds or non-polar interactions have marginal implications. Also, the peptide group of the main chain is part of large amounts of hydrogen bonds at protein-protein interfaces; and charged residues prove that electrostatic interactions play a key role in kinetics. Long-range interactions contribute to complex kinetics, while short-range hydrogen-bonds or salt bridges are critical for affinity and specificity. Implementation of these information is vital to understand binding rates and molecular interactions[8].


6. Experimental methods for macro-complex study 

Single protein enzymes do not explain the complex network of interconnected actions that take place in the cellular environment[10]. It is in fact, complex assemblies of several macromolecules that carry out most of the cellular functions[2]. Many of these complexes can be seen as molecular machines because of their modularity, complexity, cyclic functions and energy consumption[10]. Examples of such macro-complexes are the transcriptional machinery, the ribosome or the spliceosome. However, due to their size and stoichiometry, these complexes remain partially inaccessible for structure determination through experimental techniques[10]. X-ray crystallography has been the most prolific technique for structural analysis of proteins and their complexes because of its accuracy and resolution. In fact, it has helped solve macromolecular assemblies such as the RNA-polymerase or the ribosomal subunits. Still, x-ray crystallography has limitations on the amount of sample required and the crystallization process. There are alternative techniques like nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) that is able to identify the residues involved in protein interactions; electron microscopy (EM) that gives hints on the structure of large complexes through density maps; or electron tomography that is capable of visualizing assemblies in an unperturbed cellular context[2]. Any technique aims at generating a model of the structure to give as good as a representation of the real conformation as possible[3]. These composite strategies have the potential to achieve greater accuracy, coverage, resolution and efficiency; to generate possible alternative models that include information on stoichiometry, interaction data, homology to known structures, docking results and low-resolution images. Moreover, they represent a feasible way of describing the structure and dynamics of stable and transient complexes[2]. Structure determination by crystallography or NMR will lead to the deposition of set atomic coordinates of the single protein or complex at the Protein Data Bank (PDB) making it available to the scientific community[5].


7. Structural Bioinformatics 

On one hand, unbalanced data from sequence-known proteins and structure-known proteins has limited the capacity of scientific understanding of molecular mechanisms of proteins, protein networks and further applications such as drug design[11]. On the other hand, there is a need for approaches to analyse large data sets that cannot be processed manually. As an example of this are 3D macromolecular structure accessible from public databases like PDB. In this confluence, structural bioinformatics emerges as the field oriented towards: 1) analysis and display of structural information at atomic subcellular spatial scales[3] and 2) development of automated methods for efficient three-dimensional modelling of proteins from its sequence information[11]. 


9. Algorithm for model prediction

Advances in functional genomics techniques bring us with the possibility to bridge the gap between cellular and structural biology. Genome sequencing provides a complete reference list of macromolecules present in a cell. And interaction discovery approaches like affinity purification reveal details of the cellular interactive network, but with low molecular resolution. Meaning that we can see which are the interactive subunits, but not how they interact. This limitation might be solved by similarities to interacting proteins of known 3D structure. Hence, interaction models are inferred through component pairs with similar sequence to the interacting region of a known structure. Following this approach, macromolecular complexes can be predicted by assembling its components as detailed in the interaction models. Further steps include domain assignment within the structure and search for relevant templates on which to model interactions between complex components.  Additionally, structure conservation can overcome a lack of sequence similarity in determining a possible fold. This could be used in structure comparison to known domains from SCOP database[12].

Recent experimental advances have helped solve macromolecular complex structures, extending the number of described interaction interfaces by including not only protein-protein interfaces but also protein-DNA interfaces and protein-RNA interfaces. As we know, biological molecules interact with many other molecules to carry out their function. Therefore, pairwise alignment of individual molecules not including how many interactions exist, may not capture the comprehensive structural similarities between two complexes[13].

Prediction algorithms reviewed here are comparative modelling (homology-based and structure-based), threading (template-based) and docking (structure-based).

Comparative modelling involves the generation of a theoretical model of a protein that includes its sequence information and the known structure(s) with some degree of similarity. Proteins can be superimposed to generate structural alignments and then compare its main parts like the active sites. Amino acid mutations, hydrogen bonds or bond angles can also be represented through graphic interfaces. Structure templates can be extracted from the PDB or adding a step with BLAST. The general steps might include the superimposition of the related three-dimensional structures, the generation of a sequence multiple alignment, framework generation for the new sequence, rebuild lacking loops, completion and correction of the structural backbone, correction and rebuilding of the side-chains, verification of the model quality and refinement of the structure by energy minimization. However, homology modelling is commonly complemented with threading to improve the alignment and ab initio folding to predict loops and molecular dynamics simulation for the force of the native structure[3]. 

Threading is energy-based fold recognition method widely used for distant homology recognition. Algorithm such as Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP4) belong to this category[3]. Follows a strategy that recognizes motifs or folds in sequences that are fitted to backbone coordinates of known protein structures. The compatibility between the generated and template model is evaluated by a set of empirical potentials derived from a set of known proteins structure[14]. 

Docking wants to find the best match for given 3D coordinates of receptor and ligand proteins. Docking starts with a search algorithm that returns candidate conformations arranged in relation to their performance over a high-quality scoring function. Scoring functions consider geometric, chemical and electrostatic complementarity, Van Der Waals forces or knowledge-based potentials. Higher scores represent models closer to the native conformation of the complex[9]. 


10. Superimposition

Superimposing atomic coordinates is a procedure that determines the best rigid-body rotation and translation that matches a given set of measured atomic coordinates to a fixed set of guide coordinates and minimizes the weighted sum of squared deviations[15]. Superimposition aims to find a geometric alignment of two protein structures. On one side, it tries to maximize the number of pairs of equivalent main-chain atoms. On the other side, is tries to minimize the root mean square error of the rigid-body superimposition of the atom pairs[16]. It could be argued that both goals could lead to a conflict of optimization. Therefore, we need to acknowledge the ambiguity in comparing superimposition models. Is it more optimal to have 60 residues to 1.8A RMSD, or 70 residues to 2.0A RMSD?[16]

Structure superimposition has many advantages. Distant homologous may not be recognized by their AA sequence because of evolutionary divergences, in this case 3D protein superimposition is very valuable (STAMP)[3]. Structures may also refer to different proteins, such as the ones obtained for mutated proteins or from a specific gene family. It is then critical to find the best alignment for the structures, to check for putatively shared structural or functional motifs among the structures[17]. However, it also has some drawbacks. Positioning protein structures in a three-dimensional space is a major problem in protein structure determination and modelling. Information obtained from NMR for instance, will help determine the protein’s structure but not at different times. Therefore, it is important to find the best superimposition for the structures, so that they can reflect the dynamic changes of the structures over time[17].


11. Conclusion

Thanks to high-resolution structural information about biological systems, we can aim at reasoning precisely about functions and effects of modifications and perturbations over the systems[3]. 
Structure prediction of protein complexes and interactions is far from complete and it faces new challenges. There is room for improvement in sample quality and assessment of the accuracy of the model predictions. Moreover, the computational challenges focus on the need for prediction methods able to integrate individual protein information, macro-molecular complexes and the sophisticated dynamic network that connects them[12]. 


<h4>REFERENCES</h4>

[1]	J. Espadaler, O. Romero-Isart, R. M. Jackson, and B. Oliva, “Prediction of protein–protein interactions using distant conservation of sequence patterns and structure relationships,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 16, pp. 3360–3368, Jun. 2005.

[2]	R. B. Russell et al., “A structural perspective on protein–protein interactions,” Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 313–324, 2004.

[3]	P. E. BOURNE and H. WEISSING, Structural Bioinformatics. John Wiley & Sons, 2003.

[4]	S. E. Ahnert, J. A. Marsh, H. Hernández, C. V Robinson, and S. A. Teichmann, “Principles of assembly reveal a periodic table of protein complexes,” Science (80-. )., vol. 350, no. 6266, p. aaa2245, Dec. 2015.

[5]	M. Zacharias, Protein-protein complexes: Analysis, modeling and drug design. 2010.

[6]	P. Aloy and R. B. Russell, “Ten thousand interactions for the molecular biologist,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1317–1321, 2004.

[7]	R. C. Lua, D. C. Marciano, P. Katsonis, A. K. Adikesavan, A. D. Wilkins, and O. Lichtarge, “Prediction and redesign of protein–protein interactions,” Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 194–202, 2014.

[8]	J. Janin, “Kinetics and thermodynamics of protein-protein interactions,” in Protein-Protein Recognition, C. Kleanthous, Ed. Oxford University Press, 2001, pp. 1–26.

[9]	N. Tuncbag, A. Gursoy, and O. Keskin, “Prediction of protein–protein interactions: unifying evolution and structure at protein interfaces,” Phys. Biol., vol. 8, no. 3, p. 35006, 2011.

[10]	E. Nogales and N. Grigorieff, “Molecular Machines: Putting the Pieces Together,” J. Cell Biol., vol. 152, no. 1, pp. F1–F10, Jan. 2001.

[11]	J. Gu and P. E. Bourne, Structural Bioinformatics. Jhon Wiley & Sons, 2009.

[12]	P. Aloy et al., “Structure-Based Assembly of Protein Complexes in Yeast,” Science (80-. )., vol. 303, no. 5666, pp. 2026 LP – 2029, Mar. 2004.

[13]	X. Cui, H. Naveed, and X. Gao, “Finding optimal interaction interface alignments between biological complexes,” Bioinformatics, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. i133–i141, Jun. 2015.

[14]	D. T. Jones, W. R. Taylort, and J. M. Thornton, “A new approach to protein fold recognition,” Nature, vol. 358, no. 6381, pp. 86–89, 1992.

[15]	A. D. Mclachlan, “A mathematical procedure for superimposing atomic coordinates of proteins,” Acta Cryst., pp. 656–657, 1972.

[16]	F. Zu-kang and M. J. Sippl, “Optimum superimposition of protein structures : ambiguities and implications,” Fold. Des., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 123–132, 1996.

[17]	D. Wu and Z. Wu, “Superimposition of protein structures with dynamically weighted RMSD,” J. Mol. Model., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 211–222, 2010.
